README.md, before:

# MAAS-ansible-playbook
An Ansible playbook for installing and configuring MAAS, further documentation is found [here](https://maas.io/docs/ansible-playbooks-reference).

## Supported versions
This playbook has been tested with Ansible version 5.10.0 and above. We recommend using the latest available stable version of Ansible (currently 7.x). The `netaddr` Python library needs to be installed on the machine on which Ansible is used; note that this is not required on remote hosts.

## Install

```
git clone git@github.com:maas/maas-ansible-playbook
```

To install all python requirements (including Ansible itself) into a virtual Python 3 environment, you should navigate to the root of the repository cloned above and run:

```bash
python3 -m venv maas-ansible-venv
source maas-ansible-venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Please remember to activate your virtual environment every time you open a new shell by navigating to the root of this repository and running:

```bash
source maas-ansible-venv/bin/activate
```

To learn more about the usage of python virtual environments please refer to the official documentation [here](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html).


## Setup
This playbook has several main roles, each has a corresponding group to assign hosts to. They are as follows:

- **maas_pacemaker**: This role and group are for a set of hosts to be configured as a Pacemaker cluster to manage HA Postgres. It is recommended that `maas_corosync` is a child group of this group. It is also recommended that these are the same hosts as the `maas_postgres` group. This role is optional, but required for HA Postgres.

- **maas_corosync**: This role and group are for a set of hosts to be configured to run a Corosync cluster, used for managing quorum of a HA Postgres cluster. This role is optional, but required for HA Postgres.

- **maas_postgres**: This role and group are for a host to be configured as a Postgres instance for the MAAS stack. If more than one host is assigned this role, Postgres will be configured in HA, which then makes the `maas_corosync` and `maas_pacemaker` roles required. This role is required.

- **maas_region_controller**: This role and group are for hosts to be configured as MAAS Region Controllers. This role is required at least once.

- **maas_rack_controller**: This role and group are for hosts to be configured as MAAS Rack Controllers. This role is required at least once.

- **maas_postgres_proxy**: This role and group are for hosts to be configured as an HAProxy instance in front of the HA Postgres cluster, in order to ensure queries are directed to the primary instance. We recommend this group is assigned to the same hosts as `maas_region_controller`, this will have HAProxy's listener bind to localhost and route queries for that specific region controller. This role is optional, but recommended for HA Postgres.

- **maas_proxy**: This role and group are for hosts to be configured as an HAProxy instance in front of region controllers for HA stacks. This role is optional.

### Host file

Two formats can be used to define the inventory (`ini` and `yaml`). Below, the same inventory can be found twice: defined in both formats. Only one is to be chosen when running the playbook.  

More information can be found on the [Ansible inventory documentation page](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/inventory_guide/intro_inventory.html).

#### ini

```ini
[maas_corosync]
db01.example.com
db02.example.com
db03.example.com

[maas_pacemaker:children]
maas_corosync

[maas_postgres]
db01.example.com
db02.example.com
db03.example.com

[maas_postgres_proxy]
region01.example.com
region02.example.com
region03.example.com

[maas_region_controller]
region01.example.com
region02.example.com
region03.example.com

[maas_rack_controller]
region01.example.com
rack01.example.com
rack02.example.com

[maas_proxy]
proxy01.example.com
```

#### yaml

```yaml
---
all:
  children:
    maas_pacemaker:
      children:
        maas_corosync:
          hosts:
            db01.example.com
            db02.example.com
            db03.example.com
    maas_postgres:
      hosts:
        db01.example.com:
        db02.example.com:
        db03.example.com:
    maas_proxy:
      hosts:
        proxy01.example.com:
    maas_postgres_proxy:
      hosts:
        region01.example.com:
    maas_region_controller:
      hosts:
        region01.example.com:
        region02.example.com:
        region03.example.com:
    maas_rack_controller:
      hosts:
        region01.example.com:
        rack01.example.com:
        rack02.example.com:
```

Note: the Pacemaker role requires host-specifc variables that should be defined in the hosts file, they are as follows:

- `maas_pacemaker_fencing_driver`: The Pacemaker STONITH fencing driver, defaults to `ipmilan`. This driver is used to forcefully remove a member from the Pacemaker cluster when it exhibits erroneous behavior. Pacemaker will list the available drivers with the following command: `stonith_admin --list-installed`

- `maas_pacemaker_stonith_params`: The parameters specific to the fencing driver selected. These must be defined when using Pacemaker, to see the parameters of a given driver, run `stonith_admin --metadata --agent <driver>`

## Run

This playbook requires a user to set the following set of variables:

- **maas_version**: The intended version of MAAS to install.\
  Example: `'3.2'`

- **maas_postgres_password**: The password for the MAAS postgres user.\
  Example: `'my_password'`

- **maas_installation_type**: The intended type of MAAS installation.\
  Possible values are: `'deb'` or `'snap'`

- **maas_url**: The MAAS URL where MAAS will be accessed and which rack controllers should use for registering with region controllers.\
  Example: `'http://proxy01.example.com:5240/MAAS'`


There are additional optional variables that can be passed to the playbooks:

- ### Admin credentials (if setting up an admin user)

  - **admin_username**: The username of the admin user\
    Default: `admin`

  - **admin_password**: The password of the admin user\
    Default: `admin`

  - **admin_email**: The email address of the admin user\
    Default: `admin@email.com`

  - **admin_id**: the Launchpad or GitHub id of the admin user to import ssh keys.
    (Optional)

- **maas_proxy_postgres_proxy_enabled**: Use postgres proxy uri\
  Default: `false`

- **enable_tls**: Whether MAAS should enable TLS\
  Default: `false` (only valid for MAAS >= 3.2)

- **enable_firewall**: Whether MAAS should configure the firewall\
  Default: `true`
- ### MAAS Vault (only valid for MAAS >= 3.3)

  - **vault_integration**: Whether MAAS Should use Vault for secret storage\
    Default: `false`
  - **vault_url**: The URL of the MAAS Vault\
    Default: undefined
  - **vault_approle_id**: The approle id of the MAAS Vault\
    Default: undefined
  - **vault_wrapped_token**: The wrapped token for the MAAS Vault\
    Default: undefined
  - **vault_secrets_path**: The secrets path of the MAAS Vault\
    Default: undefined
  - **vault_secret_mount**: The secret mount of the MAAS Vault\
    Default: undefined

- **http_proxy**: The HTTP Proxy to use\
  Default: proxy not used

- **https_proxy**: The HTTPS Proxy to use\
  Default: proxy not used

- ### Observability

  - **o11y_enable**: Whether Observability features should be enabled\
    Default: `false`
  - **o11y_prometheus_url**: Prometheus [Remote Write Receiver](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/feature_flags/#remote-write-receiver) endpoint URL\
    Default: undefined
  - **o11y_loki_url**: Loki endpoint URL\
    Default: undefined

When the Observability features are enabled, at least one of the endpoints MUST be defined.

The following variables are only required when using HA Postgres:

- **maas_postgres_floating_ip**: The floating IP used internally to the HA Postgres cluster for the purpose of replication. A static reservation for this IP should be made in your network to avoid overlap.

- **maas_postgres_floating_ip_prefix_len**: The prefix length of the subnet within your network that the floating IP is within.

### Deploy the MAAS stack

```
ansible-playbook -i ./hosts\
    --extra-vars="maas_version=3.2 maas_postgres_password=example maas_installation_type=deb maas_url=http://example.com:5240/MAAS"\
    ./site.yaml
```

### Deploy the MAAS stack with Observability enabled

```
ansible-playbook -i ./hosts \
    --extra-vars="maas_version=3.3 \
        maas_postgres_password=example \
        maas_installation_type=snap \
        maas_url=http://example.com:5240/MAAS \
        o11y_enable=true \
        o11y_prometheus_url=http://prometheus-server:9090/api/v1/write \
        o11y_loki_url=http://loki-server:3100/loki/api/v1/push" \
    ./site.yaml
```

### Teardown the MAAS stack

```
ansible-playbook -i ./hosts ./teardown.yaml
```

### Backup the MAAS stack

Backup MAAS requires the `maas_backup_download_path` variable to be set, it will designate a path local to where the playbook is being run to download backup archives. This path must exist prior to running the playbook. `maas_installation_type` is also required.

```
ansible-playbook -i ./hosts --extra-vars="maas_backup_download_path=/tmp/maas_backups/ maas_installation_type=deb" ./backup.yaml
```

### Restore from Backup

Since backup is per-host, it is recommended to set the `maas_backup_file` variable as a host variable, or filter execution to a specific host, but `maas_backup_file` should be set to a gzipped tar file from the backup action and `maas_installation_type` should be set as well.

The below example assumes `maas_backup_file` is set in `./hosts`

```
ansible-playbook -i ./hosts --extra-vars="maas_installation_type=deb" ./restore.yaml 
```

### Create a new admin user

For an already existing MAAS installation, a new admin user can be created. The below example assumes the host for which the account is to be created is set under `[maas_region_controller]` in `./hosts`. `user_ssh` allows for upload of a Launchpad (`lp:id`) or GitHub (`gh:id`) public key, or can be left blank (`user_ssh=`). 

```
ansible-playbook -i ./hosts --extra-vars="user_name=newuser user_pwd=newpwd user_email=user@email.com user_ssh=lp:id" ./createadmin.yaml
```

### Export Observability alert rules

MAAS has a curated collection of alert rules for Prometheus and Loki. You can export these rules using the following command, where `o11y_alertrules_dest` is the directory where the files should me placed.

```
ansible-playbook --extra-vars="o11y_alertrules_dest=/tmp" ./alertrules.yaml
```

Commit message:

requirements: add passlib as explicit requirement for Mac OS users
* when using Mac OS, you need to additionally install the python module
  passlib to not run into the error:

  ```
  crypt.crypt not supported on Mac OS X/Darwin, install passlib python module.
  ```

* add passlib as dependency to requirements.txt

Signed-off-by: Jan Klare <jan.klare@bisdn.de>

README.md, after:

# MAAS-ansible-playbook
An Ansible playbook for installing and configuring MAAS, further documentation is found [here](https://maas.io/docs/ansible-playbooks-reference).

## Supported versions
This playbook has been tested with Ansible version 5.10.0 and above. We recommend using the latest available stable version of Ansible (currently 7.x). The `netaddr` Python library needs to be installed on the machine on which Ansible is used; note that this is not required on remote hosts. If you are running on Mac OS, you will also need to install the passlib python module.


## Install

```
git clone git@github.com:maas/maas-ansible-playbook
```

To install all python requirements (including Ansible itself) into a virtual Python 3 environment, you should navigate to the root of the repository cloned above and run:

```bash
python3 -m venv maas-ansible-venv
source maas-ansible-venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Please remember to activate your virtual environment every time you open a new shell by navigating to the root of this repository and running:

```bash
source maas-ansible-venv/bin/activate
```

To learn more about the usage of python virtual environments please refer to the official documentation [here](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html).


## Setup
This playbook has several main roles, each has a corresponding group to assign hosts to. They are as follows:

- **maas_pacemaker**: This role and group are for a set of hosts to be configured as a Pacemaker cluster to manage HA Postgres. It is recommended that `maas_corosync` is a child group of this group. It is also recommended that these are the same hosts as the `maas_postgres` group. This role is optional, but required for HA Postgres.

- **maas_corosync**: This role and group are for a set of hosts to be configured to run a Corosync cluster, used for managing quorum of a HA Postgres cluster. This role is optional, but required for HA Postgres.

- **maas_postgres**: This role and group are for a host to be configured as a Postgres instance for the MAAS stack. If more than one host is assigned this role, Postgres will be configured in HA, which then makes the `maas_corosync` and `maas_pacemaker` roles required. This role is required.

- **maas_region_controller**: This role and group are for hosts to be configured as MAAS Region Controllers. This role is required at least once.

- **maas_rack_controller**: This role and group are for hosts to be configured as MAAS Rack Controllers. This role is required at least once.

- **maas_postgres_proxy**: This role and group are for hosts to be configured as an HAProxy instance in front of the HA Postgres cluster, in order to ensure queries are directed to the primary instance. We recommend this group is assigned to the same hosts as `maas_region_controller`, this will have HAProxy's listener bind to localhost and route queries for that specific region controller. This role is optional, but recommended for HA Postgres.

- **maas_proxy**: This role and group are for hosts to be configured as an HAProxy instance in front of region controllers for HA stacks. This role is optional.

### Host file

Two formats can be used to define the inventory (`ini` and `yaml`). Below, the same inventory can be found twice: defined in both formats. Only one is to be chosen when running the playbook.  

More information can be found on the [Ansible inventory documentation page](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/inventory_guide/intro_inventory.html).

#### ini

```ini
[maas_corosync]
db01.example.com
db02.example.com
db03.example.com

[maas_pacemaker:children]
maas_corosync

[maas_postgres]
db01.example.com
db02.example.com
db03.example.com

[maas_postgres_proxy]
region01.example.com
region02.example.com
region03.example.com

[maas_region_controller]
region01.example.com
region02.example.com
region03.example.com

[maas_rack_controller]
region01.example.com
rack01.example.com
rack02.example.com

[maas_proxy]
proxy01.example.com
```

#### yaml

```yaml
---
all:
  children:
    maas_pacemaker:
      children:
        maas_corosync:
          hosts:
            db01.example.com
            db02.example.com
            db03.example.com
    maas_postgres:
      hosts:
        db01.example.com:
        db02.example.com:
        db03.example.com:
    maas_proxy:
      hosts:
        proxy01.example.com:
    maas_postgres_proxy:
      hosts:
        region01.example.com:
    maas_region_controller:
      hosts:
        region01.example.com:
        region02.example.com:
        region03.example.com:
    maas_rack_controller:
      hosts:
        region01.example.com:
        rack01.example.com:
        rack02.example.com:
```

Note: the Pacemaker role requires host-specifc variables that should be defined in the hosts file, they are as follows:

- `maas_pacemaker_fencing_driver`: The Pacemaker STONITH fencing driver, defaults to `ipmilan`. This driver is used to forcefully remove a member from the Pacemaker cluster when it exhibits erroneous behavior. Pacemaker will list the available drivers with the following command: `stonith_admin --list-installed`

- `maas_pacemaker_stonith_params`: The parameters specific to the fencing driver selected. These must be defined when using Pacemaker, to see the parameters of a given driver, run `stonith_admin --metadata --agent <driver>`

## Run

This playbook requires a user to set the following set of variables:

- **maas_version**: The intended version of MAAS to install.\
  Example: `'3.2'`

- **maas_postgres_password**: The password for the MAAS postgres user.\
  Example: `'my_password'`

- **maas_installation_type**: The intended type of MAAS installation.\
  Possible values are: `'deb'` or `'snap'`

- **maas_url**: The MAAS URL where MAAS will be accessed and which rack controllers should use for registering with region controllers.\
  Example: `'http://proxy01.example.com:5240/MAAS'`


There are additional optional variables that can be passed to the playbooks:

- ### Admin credentials (if setting up an admin user)

  - **admin_username**: The username of the admin user\
    Default: `admin`

  - **admin_password**: The password of the admin user\
    Default: `admin`

  - **admin_email**: The email address of the admin user\
    Default: `admin@email.com`

  - **admin_id**: the Launchpad or GitHub id of the admin user to import ssh keys.
    (Optional)

- **maas_proxy_postgres_proxy_enabled**: Use postgres proxy uri\
  Default: `false`

- **enable_tls**: Whether MAAS should enable TLS\
  Default: `false` (only valid for MAAS >= 3.2)

- **enable_firewall**: Whether MAAS should configure the firewall\
  Default: `true`
- ### MAAS Vault (only valid for MAAS >= 3.3)

  - **vault_integration**: Whether MAAS Should use Vault for secret storage\
    Default: `false`
  - **vault_url**: The URL of the MAAS Vault\
    Default: undefined
  - **vault_approle_id**: The approle id of the MAAS Vault\
    Default: undefined
  - **vault_wrapped_token**: The wrapped token for the MAAS Vault\
    Default: undefined
  - **vault_secrets_path**: The secrets path of the MAAS Vault\
    Default: undefined
  - **vault_secret_mount**: The secret mount of the MAAS Vault\
    Default: undefined

- **http_proxy**: The HTTP Proxy to use\
  Default: proxy not used

- **https_proxy**: The HTTPS Proxy to use\
  Default: proxy not used

- ### Observability

  - **o11y_enable**: Whether Observability features should be enabled\
    Default: `false`
  - **o11y_prometheus_url**: Prometheus [Remote Write Receiver](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/feature_flags/#remote-write-receiver) endpoint URL\
    Default: undefined
  - **o11y_loki_url**: Loki endpoint URL\
    Default: undefined

When the Observability features are enabled, at least one of the endpoints MUST be defined.

The following variables are only required when using HA Postgres:

- **maas_postgres_floating_ip**: The floating IP used internally to the HA Postgres cluster for the purpose of replication. A static reservation for this IP should be made in your network to avoid overlap.

- **maas_postgres_floating_ip_prefix_len**: The prefix length of the subnet within your network that the floating IP is within.

### Deploy the MAAS stack

```
ansible-playbook -i ./hosts\
    --extra-vars="maas_version=3.2 maas_postgres_password=example maas_installation_type=deb maas_url=http://example.com:5240/MAAS"\
    ./site.yaml
```

### Deploy the MAAS stack with Observability enabled

```
ansible-playbook -i ./hosts \
    --extra-vars="maas_version=3.3 \
        maas_postgres_password=example \
        maas_installation_type=snap \
        maas_url=http://example.com:5240/MAAS \
        o11y_enable=true \
        o11y_prometheus_url=http://prometheus-server:9090/api/v1/write \
        o11y_loki_url=http://loki-server:3100/loki/api/v1/push" \
    ./site.yaml
```

### Teardown the MAAS stack

```
ansible-playbook -i ./hosts ./teardown.yaml
```

### Backup the MAAS stack

Backup MAAS requires the `maas_backup_download_path` variable to be set, it will designate a path local to where the playbook is being run to download backup archives. This path must exist prior to running the playbook. `maas_installation_type` is also required.

```
ansible-playbook -i ./hosts --extra-vars="maas_backup_download_path=/tmp/maas_backups/ maas_installation_type=deb" ./backup.yaml
```

### Restore from Backup

Since backup is per-host, it is recommended to set the `maas_backup_file` variable as a host variable, or filter execution to a specific host, but `maas_backup_file` should be set to a gzipped tar file from the backup action and `maas_installation_type` should be set as well.

The below example assumes `maas_backup_file` is set in `./hosts`

```
ansible-playbook -i ./hosts --extra-vars="maas_installation_type=deb" ./restore.yaml 
```

### Create a new admin user

For an already existing MAAS installation, a new admin user can be created. The below example assumes the host for which the account is to be created is set under `[maas_region_controller]` in `./hosts`. `user_ssh` allows for upload of a Launchpad (`lp:id`) or GitHub (`gh:id`) public key, or can be left blank (`user_ssh=`). 

```
ansible-playbook -i ./hosts --extra-vars="user_name=newuser user_pwd=newpwd user_email=user@email.com user_ssh=lp:id" ./createadmin.yaml
```

### Export Observability alert rules

MAAS has a curated collection of alert rules for Prometheus and Loki. You can export these rules using the following command, where `o11y_alertrules_dest` is the directory where the files should me placed.

```
ansible-playbook --extra-vars="o11y_alertrules_dest=/tmp" ./alertrules.yaml
```
